Hello I'm Professor Brian Bushee,
welcome back.
In this video, we're going to let the data
speak, literally let the data speak.
We're gonna throw out any notion of
trying to model discretionary earnings or
unusual trends and ratios and instead just
look at the distribution of the numbers.
There's something called Benford's Law,
which reports how frequently certain
numbers appear in naturally
generated data sets.
But that means that in artificially
generated data sets, for example,
financial statements that have been
manipulated through earnings management,
the numbers won't appear in the same
frequency as Benford's Law.
And so we can look for
deviations from Benford's Law to find
financial statements that look fishy.
It's pretty off-the-wall stuff but
it's gaining prominence
as a fraud detection tool, so
let's take a look at how it works.
Okay, for our last model we're gonna throw
away all notions of trying to model any
discretionary earnings or
fraud prediction ratios.
And instead we're just gonna let the data
speak, to tell us whether it's true or
whether it's been manipulated.
And we're gonna do this with
something called Benford's Law.
So, back in 1881, Simon Newcomb
determined that the probability that
a number has a first digit, d,
is given by this equation here.
Now, apparently he discovered this
because back then you had to use
books of logarithms to
do complex calculations.
And he noticed that the pages in the ones
were much more worn than the pages in
the nines.
So, he got the idea that ones must appear
more often than nines as leading digits,
and what he found is that they
seem to follow this distribution.
In 1938,
Frank Benford found a large number of
naturally occurring data
sets follow this pattern.
So, you find this in the surface area of
rivers, molecular weights, death rates,
street addresses and the numbers
contained in an issue of Reader's Digest.
So, much like what always happens is
the person that discovers something
doesn't get the credit,
it's the person that popularizes it.
So this became known as Benford's Law
instead of Newcomb's Law.
And since then it's been used to find
irregularities in published scientific
studies, fraudulent election data in Iran,
suspicious macroeconomic data from Greece,
and tax return misreporting.
So in each of these cases the distribution
of the numbers and what you're looking at
doesn't meet this equation first
discovered by Simon Newcomb and
popularized by Frank Benford.
And we're gonna use this
distribution to look for
irregularities in financial statements.
This is, perhaps, the silliest
thing I have ever heard in my life.
And I am no spring chicken!
>> What could possibly be the explanation
for such an odd law of nature?
>> So, Benford's Law is what's called
a phenomenological law, which means that
it explains a phenomenon that occurs in
nature, but we have no idea why it occurs.
In fact, I found a quote where
a leading scientist had said
it continues to defy attempts
at an easy derivation.
So, if the scientists don't
know a good explanation,
then I certainly can't come up with one.
But it seems to work in
a lot of unconstrained,
naturally occurring data sets.
And just because we don't
understand why it happens
doesn't mean that we can't
use it to our benefit.
So, let's go on.
Here's what the expected distribution of
leading digits is under Benford's Law.
So you'd expect to see a 1 as
the first digit about 30% of the time.
Whereas a 9 would be a first
digit only about 5% of the time.
Notice that 0 doesn't appear here, so if
you're working with a decimal number like
0.05, we would consider 5
to be the leading digit.
There's another example to show
how this can detect fraud.
Here's the distribution of leading
digits from 215 months of returns for
the Fairfield Sentry Fund which was a fund
that invested only with Bernie Madoff.
And if you haven't heard of Bernie Madoff
maybe you should Google him.
It's sort of an interesting read.
But he ran this thing
called a Ponzi scheme,
which was a fraudulent investment fund
where he basically would pay off investors
from new money that he would attract.
So, as long as he would attract new money,
he could pay back to investors.
But if the new money ever stopped,
then the Ponzi scheme would collapse.
Anyway, if you look at the distribution
of the first digit of the returns,
you find that there were way too many
1's in the first digits, not enough 9's.
And so the more you see
a discrepancy from Benford's Law,
the more likely it is you're looking
at numbers that have been made up,
as opposed to represent real
returns earned by a real fund.
>> Doesn't this just indicate
that Bernie Madoff was not that
good at committing fraud?
I mean, wouldn't an expert Ponzi
schemer remember to make up returns
that conformed to
the Benford distribution?
Duh!
>> That raises an excellent point, that
as Benford's Law becomes a more popular
fraud detection technique,
eventually the fraudsters will catch on.
And they will make sure to commit their
frauds in a way where the financial
statement numbers conform to
the Benford Law of Distribution.
This happens with any kind
of fraud detection tool
where the more that the fraudsters
know about it, the more they can try
to make their numbers meet
the expected level of the model.
But nobody's found a way to manipulate all
of the tools that we've looked at in this
course, which means that even though
Benford's Law may work in a lot of cases,
you don't wanna rely on it exclusively.
Because the manager can't manipulate their
numbers to make everything look good,
they're gonna trip up somewhere, and
that's why you gotta
look at multiple tools.
The approach that we're gonna use to apply
Benford's Law to financial statements was
laid out in a paper by Dan Amiram,
Zahn Bozanic, and Ethan Rouen in 2014.
What they did was they aggregated all
the financial statement data they could
get by industries, by years,
they looked from 2000 to 2011.
And that they found that the leading
digits in finance statements
tend to follow Benford's distribution.
In fact, 83% of firm's financial
statements conform with this distribution.
So when it doesn't conform,
when there's larger discrepancies between
the distribution of numbers in
the financial statement and
the Benford distribution, they also found
larger Modified Jones Model discretionary
accruals and higher Beneish M-Scores.
So the discrepancies did seem to line up
with other tools that we've looked at to
detect earnings management.
So here's how we're gonna calculate
the discrepancy from Benford's Law.
First, we need a large number
of financial statement items.
There's no theory on how many
are needed but more is better.
So one good way to do this is to basically
take all the numbers in the balance sheet,
income statement, cash flow statement and
run this test on them.
It doesn't matter what the numbers are,
it just matters that we get these numbers.
Then we need to count the number
of each leading digit.
So, we can use an Excel formula
where we take the left most digit.
Now, you notice I've got
an absolute value here.
That's because with negative numbers
it would grab the minus sign so
we need to make it positive.
You also need to multiply it by 1,000 or
some large
multiple of 10 before taking the digits,
so that will help you with the decimals.
Cuz we don't want zero as the leading
digit, we want the first non-zero number.
Once we've got all the leading
digits from all the numbers,
we wanna count them up with an Excel
formula to get the amount of, or
the number of leading digits for
each number one through nine.
Then we can compare the actual frequency
of these leading digits to the expected
distribution under Benford's Law.
And we'll test whether it
seems to be different,
using something called
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic,
not sure how to pronounce that,
which is this sort of ugly formula here.
In this formula, AD is the actual
frequency of the leading digit, so AD is
the actual frequency for 1 is the first
number, AD2 is for 2 is the first number.
ED is the theoretical frequency or what's
expected under the Benford distribution.
And basically, what this statistic
is doing is it's looking for
the biggest point or the biggest
cumulative difference in the distribution.
Then to see if that's statistically
significant, if it's consistent with
earnings management, you wanna see if this
statistic is greater than 1.36 divided
by the square root of P, where P is
the total number of leading digits used.
So, this is something where
the cut off we're gonna use
is a function of the number
of leading digits.
>> Sweetie, y'all can't just give us
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic and
expect us to know what the lamb
y'all are talking about.
>> I completely agree, let's take
a look at an example of how this works.
So, to illustrate how to calculate this,
I've put together a spreadsheet with two
companies Dog Donut and Beagle Bagel,
two leading snack food,
breakfast food companies for dogs.
In the first tab for
Dog Donut I've got three years worth of
their financial statements, balance sheet,
income statement, and cash flow statement.
Then what I need to do is use the formula
to find the leading digit for each number.
So, for 129.30, the leading digit's 1, for
315.46 the leading digit is 3.
One that I want to show you is down here.
There's a number that's 0.51,
we can't have 0 as our leading digit, so
we wanna pull the 5 as the leading digit.
So we got all the leading digits
from all these numbers and
then we want to count everything up.
So, I've got a formula where I count
up the number of times 1 is the leading
digit, the number of times 2 is
the leading digit, then we add that up.
So, there were a 122 leading digits.
We can divide each count by the percent
to see that in this example,
1's were the leading digit 31% of
the time, 2's 13% of the time and so on.
Then I've got the expected
distribution based on Benford's Law.
And what I calculate is what's
called the cumulative difference.
So, for number one it's simple, it's just
the difference between the actual and
expected distribution for one.
For two, the cumulative differences,
I have to add up the distribution for
one and two, and compare that to the
expected distribution for one and two, and
I find the difference is 2.6%.
For three, I add up 31%, 13.9%, 20.5%,
and compare that to 30.1, 17.6, 12.5 and
they're off by 5 and so forth and so on.
So, the KS statistic is the maximum
the difference which would be 5.4,
the cutoff is this formula of 1.36
divided by the square root of 122,
which is the number of items.
We can see that the KS statistic
is way below the cut off.
So, we have no concerns
in this case that there's
manipulation based on
a deviation from Benford's law.
It conforms to Benford's
law pretty closely.
>> Why do you combine all three
years into one statistic?
Can't you do this for
each individual year?
>> Excellent point.
This is definitely
a technique that works much
better the more numbers that you have.
It doesn't work as well at detecting fraud
if you only have a very small number
of numbers to take a look at.
So, that's why using
three years of numbers,
which is sort of the maximum amount
of numbers you can get in a financial
statement, is gonna be more powerful.
Also, remember we've seen examples
where if you manipulated one year,
it also affects the other year?
So, it's easier to pick up frauds
if you find these deviations across
both years as opposed to one unusual year.
And definitely if you dig
through this example,
it's a case where you wouldn't clearly
find fraud looking at individual years.
But looking at all three years together,
it does seem like these were
artificially generated numbers
consistent with earnings management.
Now, we can do the same thing for
Beagle Bagel.
So, we put in all the financial
statement numbers we can find for
the last three years,
calculate all the leading digits,
then count up the number of each
of the leading digits to get
the actual distribution compared
to the expected distribution.
And we end up with a KS
statistic of 16.2%,
that's based on the cumulative difference
between the number of one, twos, and
threes, actually versus what
the Benford Law would say.
That 16.2% is greater
than our cutoff of 12.3%.
So, in this case we would be suspicious
that there was manipulation going on
with Beagle Bagel because their financial
statements don't meet this
Benford distribution.
And we looked at one of their close
competitors where their financial
statement does beat it.
So we can attribute this to some
kind of industry effect, instead it
looks like they may have done somethings
to manipulate there financial statements.
>> Professor, I want to enthusiastically
and sincerely thank you for
giving us 359 tools for
analyzing financial statements.
Now, I have just one
more small favor to ask.
Which doggone tool should I use?
>> You're welcome,
I've been happy to do this.
And I will ignore the sarcasm
in saying 359 tools.
So which ones should you use?
Well, you should use all of them.
[LAUGH] So one thing that I hoped has
definitely come across in these videos,
is that there is no one tool that will
pick up all forms of earnings management.
If there was one tool that always worked,
I certainly wouldn't tell you about it.
I would keep it to myself and get rich so
I wouldn't have to sit
here making these videos.
Also, as we talked about it earlier,
if there was one tool that
always seem to work,
the fraudsters would find out about it and
do their manipulation in a way
that the tool wouldn't pick it up.
So that's why you need to look at a big
range of tools to find these kinds of
problems.
The big data approaches of this
week are good starting points.
So if you've got a large number
of companies to look at,
you run the Benford's test or
the fraud prediction test,
figure out which five or
six look suspicious, and
then dive in deeper to look at the other
tools to see if there's a problem.
Because one thing I'm pretty sure about
is that the more tools that suggest
there's manipulation,
the more likely it is that you've found a
company that's manipulated their earnings.
That wraps our look at Benford's Law and
it also wraps our week
on big data approaches to try to
detect earnings management or fraud.
I hope some of these tools come in
handy for you in the future and
help you identify some firms that
may have fishy financial statements,
so that you can stay as far
away from them as possible.
And I really hope that you
enjoyed all this material and
I want to thank you for watching.
>> See you next video.